---
title: Upgrading Scientific Dialogue
---

:::{note} Astera — Upgrading Scientific Dialogue
This is a cover letter for an application to Astera for Upgrading Scientific Dialogue.

Astera aims to accelerate progress by tackling bottlenecks in scientific publishing. Funding EIRs to experiment with new information tools will transform what is possible for scientific dialogue. For Astera’s first Science EIR program, we are looking for creative, high-agency entrepreneurs who can innovate through the technical challenges to more open and interactive information exchange in the life sciences. We will prioritize strategies that leverage cutting-edge technologies to address limitations in scaling and user experience.
:::

Difficult problems that are globally relevant and urgent - like climate change, pandemics, and water security - require us to radically rethink how we publish and work on scientific breakthroughs. Advances in technology for data workflows have increased the speed and scope of scientific discovery. However, scientific dialogue still uses outdated technology for communicating and sharing knowledge, relying on static PDFs that are a poor representation of the complexities of science. This gap impedes the speed of research dissemination, reuse, and uptake: we require new mediums to compose ideas and ways to share research findings as **early and as often as possible**. For the last five years I have been working on aspects of these problems to improve authoring and publishing tools for individual researchers as well as scientific societies and institutions. We have made enormous progress and are starting to see adoption of the tools and workflows: I need help scaling up.

## Rowan Cockett

_Experienced entrepreneur, open-source developer, computational scientist_

I am a technology entrepreneur with a background in geoscience determined to transform how people access and interact with scientific content through web-based tools. While pursuing my PhD in computational geophysics at the University of British Columbia, I founded 3point Science, where we developed a web-based 3D visualization product for geological modeling. 3point was acquired in 2016 by Seequent, a global geoscience software company making desktop software — we transformed their desktop products with online collaboration, web-based 3D visualization, and version control; I ran the cloud platform team for four years, reporting directly to the CEO; Seequent sold in 2021 for $1.05B. While completing my PhD at UBC at the same time, I started [SimPEG](https://simpeg.xyz), a large-scale simulation and parameter estimation package for geophysical processes (electromagnetics, fluid-flow, gravity, etc.). My PhD received the top research prize in Canada, I was a Vanier Scholar, a Killum Laureate and won multiple awards for innovative dissemination of research. I left Seequent in 2019 to start [Curvenote](https://curvenote.com), which went through YCombinator in 2021; we raised a seed round based on our vision for building the authoring tools and publishing infrastructure that science deserves.

## Problem

_Science publishing is misaligned, hinders reuse & fast, effective sharing of research_

Incentives are focused on article publishing rather than research communication and sharing findings as early and as often as possible. Publishing infrastructure is disconnected from day-to-day workflows of scientists, and slows the progress of science. These misalignments are particularly pronounced in computational disciplines, where rapid evolution of methodologies, software, and data demands equally dynamic and interconnected platforms. Scientific publishing uses outdated technology for communicating and sharing knowledge, relying on PDFs, static figures, and text-only references that are a poor representation of the complexity of the science and data. This gap slows the speed of research dissemination, reuse, and uptake and completely impedes “networked knowledge” and importing/reusing work in a structured way. For example, “importing” visualizations, equations or any other deeply-linked content – including provenance information – into new research articles, documentation or educational sites is completely impossible in today's research ecosystem. As a metaphor, compare open-access science to open-source programming: it would be a world without package managers to share, version, reuse and rapidly build upon other peoples work in a structured way. The open-source ecosystem would not exist without this infrastructure.

> Effective and practical reuse of content that maintains attribution, provenance, and links to software and data is fundamental infrastructure that does not exist at scale in science.

Open infrastructure for communicating science also has to be easy to integrate into existing tools, support computational, interactive components, be archivable for the long term, and be adopted by our existing sociotechnical system of societies, journals, and institutions. There are two interconnected problems that need to be solved: (1) upgrade existing scientific authoring tools, ensuring these are integrated into both scientific and data-science ecosystems; and (2) develop **radically** better ways to share content as individuals, small groups, preprints, and formalized, traditional journals with existing societies and institutions.
The two problems are connected, in that the authoring tools should be able to deeply integrate with new publishing mediums (e.g. referencing a figure from a publication should be able to show you that figure directly as you are authoring, including all interactivity and computation). In addition, publishing interfaces should be able to lend themselves to curating knowledge on top of others, taking notes, etc. on the published interface and also in other user interfaces. To support every next-generation research tool on top of open access knowledge, we need access to **high-quality, structured content**, data and software — not just the scholarly metadata and citation graph.

## Solution

_Putting the communication of research directly into the researchers' hands_

My approach is twofold and requires connected work across scientific communities, startups, societies and institutions. First, I am spearheading the open-source development of a next-generation, authoring language and rendering platform: MyST Markdown ([mystmd.org](https://mystmd.org)). MyST is already used in 15.3% of active Python documentation projects; 12,877 books/tutorials have been created with JupyterBook, which uses MyST. MyST is **structured** text: allowing for importing content that maintains interactivity and attribution: opening up rich traversal of knowledge ([demo](https://mystmd.org/guide#cool-myst-features)); deeply linking into existing scholarly metadata (e.g. OpenAlex, DOIs, RRIDs; [demo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ax8rqFNP7BM)) as well as supporting current standards (e.g. JATS). When adopted by scientific societies and institutions this provides open infrastructure and standards that can transform scientific reuse and open up next-generation authoring and meta-science research tools. Secondly, through my startup, Curvenote, we have partnered with societies to introduce modern publishing infrastructure and launch new computational journals: including the American Geophysical Union (AGU; previously funded by Sloan; [overview](https://www.loom.com/share/c0b27fee8f0c4710b9b5613344897052)), Microscopy Society of America, and the Scientific Python Proceedings ([demo](https://proceedings.scipy.org)). Existing societies are key to **scaling** change and with new technology these institutions can deeply enhance reproducibility, interactivity, data, and computation as well as work towards continuous practices of releasing scientific knowledge.

## Resume

My resume can be [downloaded here](./cockett_2023_12_resume.pdf).
